Librsvg test suite
==================

Librsvg's test harness is built upon Glib's GTest utility functions.
These let you define tests in the C language.

There are three different styles of tests:

* crash - Ensures that loading and parsing (but not rendering) a
  particular SVG doesn't yield a GError.

* styles - Loads and parses an SVG, and checks that a particular SVG
  object has a certain style.

* rsvg-test - The main test suite; loads, parses, and renders SVGs and
  compares the results against reference PNG images.

These are all "black box tests": they run the library with its public
API, and test the results.  They do not test the library's internals;
just the output.

Additionally, the library's source code has smaller unit tests for
particular sections of the code.


Running the test suite
----------------------

The easiest way to run all the tests is to go to librsvg's toplevel
directory and run `make check`.  This will run both the small unit
tests and the black box tests in this `librsvg/tests` directory.

If you want to run just the black box tests, go into this
`librsvg/tests` directory and run `make check`.

Those commands will yield exit code 0 if all the tests pass, or
nonzero if some tests fail.

Running `make check` will produce a `test/test-suite.log` file.  You can
see this file for the details of failed tests.

Additionally, all three sets of black box tests (crash, styles,
rsvg-test) will produce a test report in a text file.  In the tests
directory, you can see `crash.log`, `styles.log`, `rsvg-test.log`,
respectively.


# Tests and test fixtures

## Image-based reference tests for `rsvg-test.c`

These will load, parse, and render an SVG, and compare the results
against a reference PNG image.

Each image-based reference test uses two files: `foo.svg` and
`foo-ref.png`.  The test harness will render `foo.svg` and compare the
results to `foo-ref.png`.  Currently we assume a pixel-perfect match.
If there are differences in the output, the test will fail; see
"Examining failed reference tests" below.

These files can go anywhere under the `fixtures/reftests`
directory; the `rsvg-test` program will recursively look inside
`fixtures/reftests` for all SVG files, render them, and compare them to
the `-ref.png` reference images.

SVG test files or entire subdirectories in fixtures/reftests whose
names begin with "ignore" will be skipped from the tests.  That is,
anything that matches "fixtures/reftests/ignore*" will not be included
in the tests.  You can use this to skip a few problematic files
temporarily.

As of 2016/Nov/03 we have an informal organization of these files:

* `fixtures/reftests/*.svg` - Tests for special situations
  that arose during development.

* `fixtures/reftests/bugs/*.svg` - Tests for particular bug numbers.
  Please use the bug number from Bugzilla, like 123456.svg, and the
  corresponding 123456-ref.png for the known-good reference image.

* `fixtures/reftests/svg1.1` - Tests from the W3C's SVG test suite.
  These are supposed to test all of SVG's features; we'll add them one
  by one as librsvg starts implementing the features.

### Examining failed reference tests

Let's say you run `make check` and see that one of the tests fails.
For example, `rsvg-test.log` may have lines that look like

```
# Storing test result image at /tmp/paths-data-18-f-out.png
# 6798 pixels differ (with maximum difference of 255) from reference image

# Storing test result image at /tmp/paths-data-18-f-diff.png
not ok 29 /rsvg-test/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f.svg
FAIL: rsvg-test 29 /rsvg-test/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f.svg
```

This means that the test named
`/rsvg-test/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f.svg` failed:  those are
autogenerated test names from GTest.  In this case, it means that the
test file `fixtures/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f.svg` got rendered,
and produced incorrect output when compared to
`fixtures/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f-out.png`.

When a test fails, rsvg-test creates two images in `/tmp`:

```
/tmp/foo-out.png
/tmp/foo-diff.png
```

In this case, `foo-out.png` is the actual rendered output, which is presumed to
be incorrect, since it differs from the `foo-ref.png` reference image.
The `foo-diff.png` is a "visual diff" that you can see in an image
viewer; pixels that differ are highlighted.

It is up to you to decide what to do next:

* If the `foo-out.png` image looks correct, and the only difference
  with respect to the `foo-ref.png` reference image is that
  antialiased edges look different, or font rendering is slightly
  different due to the font-rendering machinery in your system, you
  can just regenerate the test image.  See "Regenerating reference
  images" below.

* If the `foo-out.png` image is obviously wrong when compared to the
  `foo-ref.png` reference, you can file a bug in
  https://bugzilla.gnome.org.  You can wait until someone fixes it, or
  try to fix the bug yourself!

* Any other situation of course deserves attention.  Feel free to ask
  the maintainers about it; even if you figure out the problem
  yourself, a failed test almost always indicates a problem that is
  not just on your end.  See the `librsvg/MAINTAINERS` file for where
  to reach them.


### Regenerating reference images

Let's continue with the example above, where the test
`/rsvg-test/reftests/svg1.1/paths-data-18-f.svg` failed.  Let's say you
fix the bug, or determine that the output image is in fact correct,
and just differs from the reference image due to antialiasing
artifacts.  In this case, you'll want to regenerate the reference
image so the test passes again.

If you want to regenerate the reference image
`fixtures/reftests/foo/bar-ref.png` from the corresponding `bar.svg`, you can run

```
rsvg-convert -o fixtures/reftests/foo/bar-ref.png fixtures/reftests/foo/bar.svg
```

This is just the normal rsvg-convert program doing its job; it will
just render the SVG image and output it to the specified PNG file.

You can then run `make check` again and ensure that the tests pass.


### Issues with the official SVG test suite

Our SVG files in tests/fixtures/reftests/svg1.1 come from the "SVG 1.1
Second Edition test suite" archive linked here:

https://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/WG/wiki/Test_Suite_Overview

We don't know how the reference PNG files in that archive are
generated.  However, they are done in such a way that objects tend not
to be pixel-aligned.  For example, many tests have a rectangular frame
around the whole viewport, defined like this:

```
<rect id="test-frame" x="1" y="1" width="478" height="358" fill="none" stroke="#000000"/>
```

This specifies no stroke with, so it uses 1 by default.  The desired
effect is "stroke this rectangle with a 1-pixel wide line".

However, notice that the (x, y) coordinates of the rect are (1, 1).
This means that the actual bounds of the stroked outline are from
(0.5, 0.5) to (479.5, 359.5).  The result is a fuzzy outline: it
occupies two pixels of width, with each pixel having half-black
coverage.

Some elements in the reference PNG images from the official SVG test
suite are pixel-aligned, and some are not, like the example test-frame
above.  It looks like their renderer uses a (0.5, 0.5) offset just for
strokes, but not for fills, which sounds hackish.

Our test suite doesn't use special offsets so that SVG images not from
the official test suite are rendered "normally".  This means that the
reference images from the official test suite will always fail
initially, since stroke outlines will be fuzzy in librsvg, but not in
the test suite (and conversely, SVGs *not* from the test suite would
be crips in librsvg but probably not in the test suite's renderer
renderer).

Also, the original reference PNGs either use fonts that are different
from those usually on free software systems, or they use SVG fonts
which librsvg currently doesn't support (with glyph shapes referenced
from a secondary SVG).

In any case, look at the results by hand, and compare them by eye to
the official reference image.  If the thing being tested looks
correct, and just the outlines are fuzzy — and also it is just the
actual font shapes that are different — then the test is probably
correct.  Follow the procedure as in "Regenerating reference images"
listed above in order to have a reference image suitable for librsvg.


## Crash tests for `crash.c`

These load and parse an SVG, and ensure that there are no errors in
the process.  Note that this does *not* render the images.

The SVG images live in the `fixtures/crash` directory.  The `crash`
program will look recursively look inside `fixtures/crash` for all SVG
files, load them, and ensure that no GError was produced while loading
each file.


## Style tests for `styles.c`

These load and parse an SVG, ask librsvg to fetch an SVG object by its
id, and ensure that the object has certain style properties with
particular values.

The SVG images live in the `fixtures/styles` directory.  The
corresponding object IDs and values to be tested for are in the
`styles.c` source code.
